.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Ian Piumarta
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Steven Flintham
.\" 
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
.\" obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
.\" files (the 'Software'), to deal in the Software without
.\" restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy,
.\" modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the
.\" Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished
.\" to do so, provided that the above copyright notice(s) and this
.\" permission notice appear in all copies of the Software and that
.\" both the above copyright notice(s) and this permission notice
.\" appear in supporting documentation.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS'.  USE ENTIRELY AT YOUR OWN RISK.
.\"
.Dd June 7, 2014
.Dt LIB6502 3 LOCAL
.Os ""
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.\"
.Nm lib6502
.Nd 6502 microprocessor emulator
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.\"
.In stdint.h
.In lib6502.h
.Ft M6502 *
.Fn M6502_new "M6502_Registers *registers" "M6502_Memory memory" "M6502_Callbacks *callbacks"
.Ft void
.Fn M6502_reset "M6502 *mpu"
.Ft void
.Fn M6502_nmi "M6502 *mpu"
.Ft void
.Fn M6502_irq "M6502 *mpu"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn M6502_getVector "M6502 *mpu" "vector"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn M6502_setVector "M6502 *mpu" "vector" "uint16_t address"
.Ft M6502_Callback
.Fn M6502_getCallback "M6502 *mpu" "type" "uint16_t address"
.Ft M6502_Callback
.Fn M6502_setCallback "M6502 *mpu" "type" "uint16_t address" "M6502_Callback callback"
.Ft void
.Fn M6502_run "M6502 *mpu"
.Ft int
.Fn M6502_disassemble "M6502 *mpu" "uint16_t address" "char buffer[64]"
.Ft void
.Fn M6502_dump "M6502 *mpu" "char buffer[64]"
.Ft void
.Fn M6502_delete "M6502 *mpu"
.Ft void
.Fn M6502_setMode "M6502 *mpu" "M6502_Mode mode" "int arg"
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.\"
.Fn M6502_new
creates an instance of a 6502 microprocessor.
.Fn M6502_reset ,
.Fn M6502_nmi
and 
.Fn M6502_irq
place it into the states associated with the hardware signals for
reset, non-maskable interrupt and interrupt request, respectively.
The macros
.Fn M6502_getVector
and
.Fn M6502_setVector
read and write the vectors through which the processor jumps in
response to the above signals.  The macros
.Fn M6502_getCallback
and
.Fn M6502_setVector
read and write client-supplied functions that intercept accesses to
memory.
.Fn M6502_run
begins emulated execution.
.Fn M6502_dump
and
.Fn M6502_disassemble
create human-readable representations of processor or memory state.
.Fn M6502_delete
frees all resources associated with a processor instance.  
.Fn M6502_setMode
specifies the emulation mode to use for a processor instance.  Each of
these functions and macros is described in more detail below.
.Pp
.Fn M6502_new
returns a pointer to a
.Fa M6502
structure containing at least the following members:
.Bd -literal
struct _M6502
{
    M6502_Registers  *registers;   /* processor state */
    uint8_t          *memory;      /* memory image */
    M6502_Callbacks  *callbacks;   /* r/w/x/illegal callbacks */
};
.Ed
.Pp
These members are initialised according to the supplied
.Fa registers ,
.Fa memory
and
.Fa callbacks
arguments.  If a given argument is NULL, the corresponding member is
initialised automatically with a suitable (non-NULL) value.
.Pp
The members of
.Fa M6502
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa callbacks"
.It Fa registers
the processor state, containing all registers and condition codes.
.It Fa memory
a block of at least 64 kilobytes of storage containing the processor's
memory.  (An array type
.Vt M6502_Memory,
suitable for defining values to pass as the
.Fa memory
argument, is defined in the
.In lib6502.h
include file.)
.It Fa callbacks
a structure mapping processor memory accesses to client callback
functions.
.El
.Pp
Access to the contents of the
.Fa registers
and
.Fa memory
members can be made directly.
The
.Fa registers
member is a
.Vt M6502_Registers
containing the following members:
.Bd -literal
struct _M6502_Registers
{
    uint8_t   a;  /* accumulator */
    uint8_t   x;  /* X index register */
    uint8_t   y;  /* Y index register */
    uint8_t   p;  /* processor status register */
    uint8_t   s;  /* stack pointer */
    uint16_t pc;  /* program counter */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa memory
member is an array of
.Vt unsigned char
and can be indexed directly.  In addition, two convenience macros
.Fn M6502_getVector
and
.Fn M6502_setVector
provide access to the reset and interrupt vectors within
.Fa memory .
.Fn M6502_getVector
returns the address stored in the named
.Fa vector
which must be precisely one of the following:
.Bl  -tag -width ".Dv RST" -offset indent
.It Dv RST
the reset vector.
.It Dv NMI
the non-maskable interrupt vector.
.It Dv IRQ
the interrupt request vector.
.El
.Pp
.Fn M6502_setVector
stores its
.Fa address
argument in the named
.Fa vector
and returns the new value.
.Pp
The
.Fa callbacks
member contains an opaque structure mapping processor memory accesses
to client callback functions.  Whenever the processor performs an
access for which a corresponding entry exists in the the
.Fa callbacks
structure, the emulator suspends execution and invokes the callback to
complete the operation.  Each callback function should have a
signature equivalent to:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
int
.Va callback
(M6502 *mpu, uint16_t address, uint8_t data);
.Ed
.Pp
The macros
.Fn M6502_getCallback
and
.Fn M6502_setCallback
read and write entries in the
.Fa callbacks
structure.  These macros identify a unique memory access operation
from the specified
.Fa address
on which it operates and
.Fa type
of access involved.  The
.Fa type
argument must be one of the following:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv write"
.It Dv read
the
.Fa callback
is invoked when the processor attempts to read from the
given address.  The emulator passes the effective address of the
operation to the callback in its
.Fa address
argument.  (The
.Fa data
argument is undefined.)  The value returned by the callback will be
used by the emulator as the result of the read operation.
.It Dv write
the
.Fa callback
is invoked when the processor attempts to write to the
given address.  The emulator passes the effective address of the
operation to the callback in its
.Fa address
argument and the byte being written in the
.Fa data
argument.  The emulator will not perform the write operation before
invoking the callback; if the write should complete, the callback must
modify the processor's
.Fa memory
explicitly.  The valued returned from the callback is ignored.
.It Dv call
the
.Fa callback
is invoked when the processor attempts to transfer control to the
given address by any instruction other than a relative branch.  The
emulator passes the destination address to the callback in its
.Fa address
argument and the instruction that initiated the control transfer in
its
.Fa data
argument (one of JMP, JSR, BRK, RTS or RTI).  If the callback returns
zero (the callback refuses to handle the operation) the emulator will
allow the operation to complete as normal.  If the callback returns a
non-zero address (indicating that the callback has handled the
operation internally) the emulator will transfer control to that
address.
.It Dv illegal_instruction
the
.Fa callback
is invoked when the processor attempts to execute the illegal instruction
whose opcode is the given "address".  The emulator passes the address of the
instruction to the callback in its
.Fa address
argument and the instruction itself in the
.Fa data
argument.  If the callback returns a non-zero address the 
emulator will transfer control to that address, otherwise execution will 
continue at the next instruction.
.El
.Pp
.Fn M6502_getCallback
returns zero if there is no callback associated with the given
.Fa type
and
.Fa address .
Passing zero as the
.Fa callback
argument of
.Fn M6502_setCallback
removes any callback that might have been associated with
.Fa type
and
.Fa address .
.Pp
.Fn M6502_run
emulates processor execution in the given
.Fa mpu
by repeatedly fetching the instruction addressed by
.Fa pc
and dispatching to it.  This function normally never returns.
.Pp
.Fn M6502_dump
writes a (NUL-terminated) symbolic representation of the processor's
internal state into the supplied
.Fa buffer .
Typical output resembles:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
PC=1010 SP=01FE A=0A X=5B Y=00 P=D1 NV-B---C
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn M6502_disassemble
writes a (NUL-terminated) symbolic representation of the instruction
in the processor's memory at the given
.Fa address
into the supplied
.Fa buffer .
It returns the size (in bytes) of the instruction.  (In other words,
the amount by which
.Fa address
should be incremented to arrive at the next instruction.)
Typical output resembles:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
1009 cpx #5B
.Ed
.Pp
(The
.Fa buffer
arguments are oversized to allow for future expansion.)
.Pp
.Fn M6502_delete
frees the resources associated with the given
.Fa mpu.
Any members that were allocated implicitly (passed as NULL to
.Fn M6502_new )
are deallocated.  Members that were initialised from non-NULL
arguments are not deallocated.
.Pp
.Fn M6502_setMode
is a lib6502-jit extension which sets the emulation mode to use for the
instance to
.Fa mode ,
which must be precisely one of the following:
.Bl  -tag -width ".Dv RST" -offset indent
.It Dv M6502_ModeInterpreted
6502 code will be interpreted, much as in lib6502 itself.
.It Dv M6502_ModeCompiled
6502 code will always be compiled to host code before executing.  This can result
in jerky execution as emulation halts during compilation.  Self-modifying code
will work correctly, but if this happens a lot the repeated re-compilations
will result in very slow execution.
.It Dv M6502_ModeHybrid
6502 code will be compiled to host code but the interpreter will be used to
continue execution during compilation.  Execution will be smooth and relatively
fast but performance of repeatedly executed code will vary (in theory, improve)
over time.  Repeated self-modification by code will cause re-compilations but
performance will still be reasonable as the interpreter will continue execution;
the main downside is that CPU will be taken up by the compilation.  (On a
machine with two or more idle cores, this is wasteful but should not
significantly harm performance, as one core will run the interpreter while the
other handles the compilation.)  This is the default mode.
.El
.Pp
.Fa arg
is the maximum number of 6502 instructions to be compiled into a single unit
of code when hybrid or compiled mode is selected; it is ignored in interpreted
mode.  Specifying 0 will give a reasonable default value.
.Pp
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.\" 
You can share the
.Fa memory
and
.Fa callbacks
members of
.Vt M6502
between multiple instances to simulate multiprocessor hardware.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" 
.Fn M6502_new
returns a pointer to a
.Vt M6502
structure.
.Fn M6502_getVector
and
.Fn M6502_setVector
return the contents of the given
.Fa vector .
.Fn M6502_getCallback
and
.Fn M6502_setCallback
return the
.Vt M6502_Callback
function associated with the given
.Fa address
and access
.Fa type .
.Fn M6502_disassemble
returns the size (in bytes) of the instruction at the given
.Fa address .
.Fn M6502_reset ,
.Fn M6502_nmi ,
.Fn M6502_irq ,
.Fn M6502_run ,
.Fn M6502_dump,
.Fn M6502_delete
and
.Fn M6502_setMode
don't return anything (unless you forgot to include
.In lib6502.h ) .
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh EXAMPLES
.\" 
The following program creates a 6502 processor, sets up callbacks for
printing characters and halting after a BRK instruction, stores a
program into memory that prints the alphabet, disassembles the program
on stdout, and then executes the program.
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact

#include <stdint.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

#include "lib6502.h"

#define WRCH    0xFFEE

int wrch(M6502 *mpu, uint16_t address, uint8_t data)
{
  int pc;
  putchar(mpu->registers->a);
  pc  = mpu->memory[++mpu->registers->s + 0x100];
  pc |= mpu->memory[++mpu->registers->s + 0x100] << 8;
  return pc + 1;  /* JSR pushes next insn addr - 1 */
}

int done(M6502 *mpu, uint16_t address, uint8_t data)
{
  char buffer[64];
  M6502_dump(mpu, buffer);
  printf("\\nBRK instruction\\n%s\\n", buffer);
  exit(0);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
  M6502    *mpu = M6502_new(0, 0, 0);
  unsigned  pc  = 0x1000;

  mpu->callbacks->call[WRCH] = wrch;     /* write character */
  mpu->callbacks->call[0000] = done;     /* reached after BRK */

# define gen1(X)        (mpu->memory[pc++] = (uint8_t)(X))
# define gen2(X,Y)      gen1(X); gen1(Y)
# define gen3(X,Y,Z)    gen1(X); gen2(Y,Z)

  gen2(0xA2, 'A'     );  /* LDX #'A'   */
  gen1(0x8A          );  /* TXA        */
  gen3(0x20,0xEE,0xFF);  /* JSR FFEE   */
  gen1(0xE8          );  /* INX        */
  gen2(0xE0, 'Z'+1   );  /* CPX #'Z'+1 */
  gen2(0xD0, -9      );  /* BNE 1002   */
  gen2(0xA9, '\\n'    );  /* LDA #'\\n'  */
  gen3(0x20,0xEE,0xFF);  /* JSR FFEE   */
  gen2(0x00,0x00     );  /* BRK        */

  {
    uint16_t ip = 0x1000;
    while (ip < pc)
      {
        char insn[64];
        ip += M6502_disassemble(mpu, ip, insn);
        printf("%04X %s\\n", ip, insn);
      }
  }

  M6502_setVector(mpu, RST, 0x1000);

  M6502_reset(mpu);
  M6502_run(mpu);
  M6502_delete(mpu);

  return 0;
}
.Ed
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" 
If
.Fn M6502_new
cannot allocate sufficient memory it prints "out of memory" to stderr
and exits with a non-zero status.
.Pp
If
.Fn M6502_run
encounters an illegal or undefined instruction, it prints "undefined
instruction" and the processor's state to stderr, then exits with a
non-zero status.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.\" 
M6502 is a generic name. The initial letter is mandated by C naming
conventions and chosen in deference to MOS Technology, the original
designers of the processor.  To the best of my knowledge the 'M'
prefix was never stamped on a physical 6502.
.Pp
The emulator implements the CMOS version of the processor (NMOS bugs
in effective address calculations involving page boundaries are
corrected).  lib6502 does not tolerate the execution of undefined
instructions (which were all no-ops in the first-generation CMOS
hardware); lib6502-jit treats them as no-ops.  It would be nice to
support the several alternative instruction sets (model-specific
undocumented instructions in NMOS models, and various documented
extensions in the later CMOS models) but there are currently no plans
to do so.
.Pp
The emulated 6502 will run much faster than real hardware on any
modern computer.  The fastest 6502 hardware available at the time of
writing has a clock speed of 14 MHz.  On a 2 GHz PowerPC, the emulated
6502 runs at almost 300 MHz (in interpreted mode).
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.\" 
.Xr run6502 1
.Pp
For development tools, documentation and source code:
.Pa http://6502.org
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh AUTHORS
.\" 
The original lib6502 software and manual pages were written by Ian Piumarta.
Additional changes to create lib6502-jit were made by Steven Flintham.
.Pp
The software is provided as-is, with absolutely no warranty, in the
hope that you will enjoy and benefit from it.  You may use (entirely
at your own risk) and redistribute it under the terms of a very
liberal license that does not seek to restrict your rights in any way
(unlike certain so-called 'open source' licenses that significantly
limit your freedom in the name of 'free' software that is, ultimately,
anything but free).  See the file COPYING for details.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh BUGS
.\" 
.Fn M6502_getVector
and
.Fn M6502_setVector
evaluate their arguments more than once.
.Pp
The out-of-memory condition and attempted execution of
illegal/undefined instructions should not be fatal errors.
.Pp
There is no way to limit the duration of execution within
.Fn M6502_run
to a certain number of instructions or cycles.
.Pp
The emulator should support some means of implicit interrupt
generation, either by polling or in response to (Unix) signals.
.Pp
The
.Sx COMPATIBILITY
section in this manual page has been diverted from its legitimate
purpose.
.Pp
The plural of 'callback' really aught to be 'callsback'.
.Pp
Please send bug reports (and feature requests) to :
lib6502-jit@lemma.co.uk.
